[Amit Varma]: The first time I heard about the internet was in the 1990s, when a friend told me about
[Amit Varma]: it with great excitement.
[Amit Varma]: He said the internet is so amazing, you can just go to this site called Yahoo and search
[Amit Varma]: for say Van Morrison, and it will display every single page about Van Morrison.
[Amit Varma]: I said, Wow, that's so cool.
[Amit Varma]: I love Van Morrison.
[Amit Varma]: At that time, if you told me all the ways in which the internet was going to change
[Amit Varma]: our lives in the next 25 years, I would have said, No way, that's science fiction.
[Amit Varma]: But much of the science fiction of that time is everyday banal reality today.
[Amit Varma]: I often think that I'm so lucky to live in these amazing times, all the information in
[Amit Varma]: the world at my fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: And within a few seconds, I can listen to any song ever recorded, download most of the
[Amit Varma]: books that exist and watch any film that I want to.
[Amit Varma]: I can connect to my friends around the world and make new ones.
[Amit Varma]: This is the most empowering tool in human history.
[Amit Varma]: But here's one question.
[Unknown]: Is there a flip side?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The topic for today is the future of the internet.
[Amit Varma]: And my guests are Nikhil Pawar of Media Nama and Amit Doshi of IVM podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM podcast, by the way, are my partners in running the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil has been worried about the future of the internet for a while.
[Amit Varma]: And he suggested the theme of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Amit co-hosts a tech podcast on IVM networks called Shunya One and is one of the most clued
[Amit Varma]: in guys I know.
[Amit Varma]: We had this conversation a few weeks ago, and it's quite a lively discussion.
[Amit Varma]: So listen in.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil and Amit, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Hello.
[Unknown]: Good to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is my first time on.
[Amit Varma]: So Nikhil, the internet like air, like water, it's something we just take for granted.
[Amit Varma]: We assume that it was always thus and always will be a wonderful free place where anyone
[Amit Varma]: can say what they want and free exchange of ideas and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But you have recently been extremely worried about the direction that the internet is going
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: Tell us a little bit more about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so you know, the the internet is this massive global space which unites the world.
[Guest]: There are potentially no geographical boundaries on the internet.
[Guest]: Something that I create or I write can be read by anyone else in the world and vice
[Guest]: versa.
[Guest]: And we've many of us have grown up with this space, right?
[Guest]: So there is, there's a sense that we belong to the internet.
[Guest]: And we feel quite often we feel more at home on the internet and people we meet of the
[Guest]: internet.
[Guest]: You know, growing up when I first started meeting friends off the internet, my, I had
[Guest]: my uncle tell me to be careful, etc. and, and text message SMS at that point in time
[Guest]: about where I am and who I'm meeting and all of that stuff.
[Guest]: We've sort of outgrown that phase now and, you know, today if you land in any country
[Guest]: in the world, you probably have people you want to meet or you already know because you've
[Guest]: interacted with them on the internet around things that are common.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the internet is this global public commons that unites the world.
[Guest]: And what's been happening over the last five or six years is that there is this massive,
[Guest]: and this is a political thing, there's a massive shift in the concentration of power on the
[Guest]: internet and the web seems to be shrinking.
[Guest]: And so, you know, our access points to the broader internet are getting more limited
[Guest]: and more controlled.
[Guest]: And what's also happening is that for the new people who are coming online, for most
[Guest]: of them, the browser is just an app on the device.
[Guest]: And so therefore, they don't really necessarily get to, you know, experience that, that, you
[Guest]: know, some silly blog somewhere that someone's written, because how will they find out that
[Guest]: this exists?
[Guest]: They don't know what a URL is, they may not know how to type a URL, the URLs are maybe
[Guest]: not in their language.
[Guest]: And so there is a shift in the way how we access the internet.
[Unknown]: This is something that's irritated me for so many years, right?
[Unknown]: I mean, we got to a point where we could get rid of desktop software by getting our browsers
[Unknown]: on the PCs, being able to do all of our stuff over there, right, our email and all that.
[Unknown]: And now we went back to the same thing as soon as mobile phones came, where now everything
[Unknown]: has to be through an app instead of being able to use like an open browser.
[Guest]: And that's actually the challenge, right?
[Guest]: So the French regulator ASEP has recently come out with a consultation paper on device
[Guest]: neutrality, saying, and you know, I was initially against that idea, because I say that, you
[Guest]: know, devices are unregulated, anyone can launch a device.
[Guest]: But there is a concentration of power that's taken place there in terms of the app stores.
[Guest]: And you know, one of the things that came up recently in India was that the TRAI, which
[Guest]: is the Indian telecom regulator, could not launch an SMS spam app on the iPhone, because
[Guest]: Apple wouldn't allow certain permissions.
[Guest]: So if you think about it, Apple is a regulator that's regulating the Indian telecom regulator.
[Guest]: And that's a bizarre situation to be in.
[Guest]: So there's, and therefore, the TRAI started pushing back.
[Guest]: But really, where we are going with this here is that Apple controls what gets on to the
[Guest]: app store in the same way that Google controls what gets on to the Play Store.
[Guest]: And between the Play Store and the app store, I think they probably have 99% of the world's
[Unknown]: phones.
[Unknown]: And they're actually not really good actors in this space a lot of times as well.
[Unknown]: I mean, like, the way that the what happened to Windows Phone, right?
[Unknown]: In some ways, is entirely because the app store and the Play Store would not play well
[Guest]: with others.
[Unknown]: But they don't play well with each other, right?
[Unknown]: Yeah, with anybody.
[Guest]: So then this is this is a fight between elephants, and the grass is getting crushed.
[Guest]: So and that grass, which is getting crushed is the internet, the broader open internet.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to go back to how you started the episode and forgive me if I ask some newbie
[Amit Varma]: questions and, you know, seemingly basic things, I just want to kind of see if I'm understanding
[Amit Varma]: you correctly, where you pointed out about how the internet is shrinking as a space.
[Amit Varma]: Now I get that all the big players are getting much, much bigger, that more people's first
[Amit Varma]: exposure to the internet is say through a Facebook, or, you know, through a Google then,
[Amit Varma]: instead of just a wild world wide web of sites that we had out there, but at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: it's still open, anyone can go out there and start anything, start their own site, start
[Amit Varma]: their own app, start their own platform, they might not get much traction, because the way
[Amit Varma]: people filter content has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of been, you know, these large companies are dominating that filtering process
[Amit Varma]: where people discover content and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I guess the way you need to look at it is that what part of this is harmful for free
[Guest]: speech, what part of this is anti competitive in nature, right?
[Guest]: And how, for example, filter bubbles impacting our discovery of things.
[Guest]: If you look at, let's say, Google search versus discovering something on Facebook, Google
[Guest]: search is largely intent based, but I'll take you back to almost 10 years ago, when news
[Guest]: cops started complaining about Google search, because Google's algorithm, which is a black
[Guest]: box, was defining how news cops content was being consumed.
[Guest]: And so we're back to that same battle here.
[Guest]: But now it's not just a battle on Google search, but it's also around Facebook and the filter
[Guest]: bubbles and the access to content there.
[Guest]: So I think another discussion that's probably going to be had, and we're not having it yet,
[Guest]: is the neutrality of algorithms, and who controls what the algorithms show us from that perspective,
[Guest]: because, you know, there was one experiment, which Facebook did in, I think, 2012, where
[Guest]: they started changing the newsfeed to make you happy, to make you happy and sad.
[Guest]: And so, you know, is it really neutral is the question?
[Guest]: And do we have multiple options in terms of algorithms as well?
[Guest]: These are discussions that are going to happen because they change the shape, not just the
[Guest]: way we consume content, but they shape how we view the world, they can shape democracies.
[Guest]: And I'd like to, you know, go back to where this battle actually started.
[Guest]: And so I kind of like to imagine Facebook as a country, and the same way Google as a
[Guest]: country and Amazon as a country.
[Guest]: And there is this turf war and this land grab that's taking place across the board.
[Guest]: So whether you look at, let's say, Amazon doing AWS, which is their hosting service,
[Guest]: Google doing Google Cloud.
[Guest]: So, you know, different companies are now looking at various industries, subsegments
[Guest]: to get into, to get more information and more control in that space.
[Guest]: Everyone wants to do commerce as well.
[Guest]: And everyone wants to do devices as well.
[Guest]: A voice is where the real battle is happening right now in terms of Google Home versus,
[Guest]: you know, the Amazon Echo.
[Guest]: You might have noticed recently, there was this battle around YouTube being removed,
[Unknown]: Chromecast, I think.
[Unknown]: So Amazon Prime is no longer available on Chromecast.
[Guest]: Amazon Prime is no longer available on Chromecast.
[Guest]: And there was a reciprocal reaction there.
[Guest]: Now, in all of this, because of these battles between these guys, consumers effectively
[Guest]: are deprived of that choice.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I don't understand that it would be a problem, what you're describing, if it
[Amit Varma]: was just one big monolithic company taking over clouds and taking over content platforms
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Unknown]: But what you seem to have here is a really healthy competition.
[Unknown]: And I think that's good for the consumer.
[Unknown]: Well, generally, I would agree with you.
[Unknown]: And I am pro competition in most places.
[Unknown]: What I think happens over here is these ecosystems develop lock-in.
[Unknown]: And when you have lock-in of that nature, it's difficult to move from one to another,
[Unknown]: right?
[Unknown]: I set up my entire home to function on a Chromecast and through using all Google services.
[Unknown]: All of a sudden, I can no longer use Amazon Prime, right?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I still use it on Chromecast casting my screen.
[Unknown]: But that is a...
[Guest]: But that's because casting is a protocol, it's not necessarily a, you know, it's...
[Guest]: And by the way, there is every possibility that casting in the future may not allow it.
[Guest]: You don't know how this is going to function in the future.
[Unknown]: So there was...
[Unknown]: And we've seen this happen before.
[Unknown]: So there was a very...
[Unknown]: So again, I mean, I brought up Windows Phone earlier, right?
[Unknown]: But there was a big problem with YouTube on Windows Phone.
[Unknown]: When Windows Phone wanted a YouTube app, Google wouldn't make it.
[Unknown]: They made their own, but they use private APIs.
[Unknown]: And then Google blocked that app.
[Unknown]: And they blocked the API.
[Amit Varma]: So there's always this kind of fight going on in these platforms.
[Amit Varma]: My...
[Amit Varma]: See, one prism through which I look at the world, as you know, Nikhil, is the whole issue
[Amit Varma]: of what is voluntary and consensual and what is not.
[Amit Varma]: And what I see happening here is, and not just in terms of devices and not just in terms
[Amit Varma]: of Google versus Facebook, is a question I always ask myself is, where is the coercion?
[Amit Varma]: Now, if all these different companies are offering different kinds of products and the
[Amit Varma]: consumer can, you know, choose between one and the other, or just take a combination
[Amit Varma]: of all of them, why get in the way of that voluntary exchange?
[Amit Varma]: Like, when you talk about the algorithm that Facebook would have to make people happy and
[Amit Varma]: sad, that yes, when I read about it, it makes me angry that damn, I'm being manipulated
[Amit Varma]: and that makes me pissed off.
[Amit Varma]: But then my appropriate reaction to that should be to go off Facebook.
[Amit Varma]: My point is that if people have signed on voluntarily to Facebook, and if everything
[Amit Varma]: is voluntary, and there's no coercion anywhere, then who are we to condescend and get in the
[Guest]: way?
[Guest]: No, so this, this particularly impacts you if you're a creator.
[Guest]: And see, this is the difference between the internet and traditional platforms like TV
[Guest]: and cable, etc.
[Guest]: And which is why the internet has no parallel.
[Guest]: When you're a creator, your dependency on the distribution platform is very, very high.
[Guest]: Now, go back to let's say another six, seven years, and there was a big battle between
[Guest]: Hatchet as a book publisher, and Amazon.
[Guest]: And Hatchet did not want Amazon to drop Hatchet prices, essentially.
[Guest]: And Amazon, therefore, started showing, I think, fewer Hatchet results in searches and
[Amit Varma]: things like that.
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a Hatchet author, I mean, I launched in India with my book, and I think
[Amit Varma]: it's legitimate.
[Guest]: I mean, it's two private parties negotiating.
[Guest]: But it's but that's where power comes in, right?
[Guest]: And the power of the platform is always going to be greater than the power of the creator.
[Guest]: One of the things you have to remember about all all platforms is that they're in the business
[Guest]: of maximizing fragmentation, and monetizing the aggregation, right?
[Guest]: So when they maximize fragmentation, and we've seen so I did some research on the YouTube
[Guest]: ecosystem.
[Guest]: And you know, when YouTube initially started, every creator was really, really happy because
[Guest]: they got special attention from YouTube and YouTube guys would come and teach them about
[Guest]: how to do better and better.
[Guest]: And you know, initially, they made a lot of money.
[Guest]: As more and more creators started coming on, they started getting less help.
[Guest]: And they started making less money.
[Guest]: And so therefore, as fragmentation increases, it's the aggregator that holds all the power.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, the way markets work is that there is only space for a few large aggregators.
[Guest]: And and the network effects that come in really inhibit competition.
[Guest]: And therefore, you've seen that with Facebook, for example, there's literally no competition,
[Guest]: the social networking space in case of I mean, in case of Amazon, India still has competition
[Guest]: in case of Flipkart.
[Guest]: But even the and I don't quite agree with them.
[Guest]: But they've also been complaining about capital dumping, because they realize now this is
[Guest]: a battle about deeper pockets.
[Guest]: And then it's going to be a last man standing game.
[Amit Varma]: So let me paraphrase your point.
[Guest]: You've convinced me in the sense that it's what I'm trying to say is that this is a power
[Guest]: game.
[Guest]: And the content creator is always going to lose in this battle.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so here's the deal.
[Amit Varma]: So what I was originally arguing, and I see the nuance that you added to that what I was
[Amit Varma]: originally arguing was that as long as there is competition, you can sell your content
[Amit Varma]: to Netflix or Amazon or blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: What you're saying, though, is that say you look at Amazon, they are basically the only
[Amit Varma]: bookseller in town, there's no other business network effects kick in.
[Amit Varma]: So if a publisher fights with them or doesn't agree to their terms, they don't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: You have a similar kind of monopoly in terms of uploading videos.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to make your own home videos and monetize them, and so on, you basically don't
[Amit Varma]: have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: You have to go to YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: So Mike, but at the same time, having said this, it seems problematic to go to a private
[Amit Varma]: party like an Amazon or YouTube in these instances, and try to regulate them.
[Amit Varma]: And especially when that regulation is done by government, it will always the process
[Amit Varma]: will always be corrupted, and there will always be unintended consequences that are also harmful
[Amit Varma]: plus it's coercion.
[Unknown]: So so how do we how do we reconcile at some point doesn't a platform become a public good?
[Unknown]: I mean, like at some point, you know, I mean, like the fact that YouTube exists as it exists,
[Unknown]: right?
[Unknown]: It is a public good.
[Unknown]: Now, at this point in time, yeah, Google owns it, Google monetize it, all of that.
[Unknown]: But it is ubiquitous in its usage.
[Unknown]: It's just so far out there that a certain amount of I hate saying governmental regulation,
[Amit Varma]: but a certain amount of oversight of some nature is necessary.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you where I agree with you and where I disagree with you, where I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: is that when we used to speak of net neutrality earlier, and I might have had this discussion
[Amit Varma]: with Nikhil and I committed from a property rights perspective, and the question I would
[Amit Varma]: ask is who owns the spectrum, the government of India owns the spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, whether they should own the spectrum or not is a separate argument.
[Amit Varma]: But given that they own the spectrum, they have a right to license it out under whatever
[Amit Varma]: terms they want.
[Amit Varma]: And when the net neutrality issue broke up, I actually went and looked at their existing
[Amit Varma]: contract with telecom providers, which allows them to change the terms in between, as Nikhil
[Amit Varma]: and gang were arguing for, right, and to impose these conditions.
[Amit Varma]: So coming at it from property rights, I get that, right.
[Amit Varma]: But let's say YouTube is someone who is, you know, they're on the internet, they're providing
[Amit Varma]: a service, they're not compelling anyone, they're not stopping competitors, who are
[Amit Varma]: we to interfere?
[Unknown]: I don't get that.
[Unknown]: All right.
[Unknown]: I know.
[Unknown]: I find what is tough is it really is tough to kind of figure out, you know, what is the
[Unknown]: differentiation?
[Unknown]: How do you make a distinction over here?
[Guest]: That's it's tough.
[Guest]: Not really, actually, I mean, look, the conversation is now changing around the fact that every
[Guest]: single entity that has over a billion users is being treated as something called a behemoth.
[Guest]: And those entities now have the power, not just to, you know, impact creators, but also
[Guest]: to shape democracy.
[Guest]: And this is exactly why governments are now becoming a lot more conscious of the power
[Guest]: of these platforms.
[Guest]: Like, I go back to the idea of Facebook as a country.
[Guest]: You know, when Zuck visits, he has these are all diplomatic visits, effectively, there's
[Guest]: a certain minutes, some talking points that are already defined with the Prime Minister
[Guest]: with different ministers.
[Guest]: So if you just zoom out and think of Facebook as a country in a virtual world, what you
[Guest]: will see is that they have a team that looks at the government policy with the government
[Guest]: as a stakeholder.
[Guest]: If you're running a page on Facebook, you're effectively, that's essentially the Ministry
[Guest]: of Commerce.
[Guest]: If you think about it, that looks at those relationships.
[Guest]: Their task is to encourage usage of the platform, but also because Facebook's, it's a business,
[Guest]: is also to ensure that there is enough monetization that comes in.
[Guest]: So there are significant controls that it is able to exert by virtue of its scale and
[Guest]: and its network effects.
[Guest]: And under those circumstances, I think regulation is bound to happen, because there are negative
[Guest]: consequences that are also coming out of it, which are impacting physical countries.
[Guest]: So let's look at a couple of them that are that are happening, right.
[Guest]: So let's look at the impact of fake news, for example.
[Guest]: The US election is very clear that, you know, they had very few advertising controls that
[Guest]: allowed the marketing and very tiny, like granular segmentation in terms of targeting
[Guest]: individuals with content that they felt would impact the way they vote.
[Guest]: I mean, there were also, there are also instances where fake sites have been created, and they're
[Guest]: saying you don't need to go and vote.
[Guest]: You can just go click here and vote on the website, right.
[Guest]: Now, these are real consequences for democracies.
[Guest]: And you need controls in place.
[Guest]: In the same way, when you look at it, let's take Uber as an example, and the rape case
[Guest]: in Delhi.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, Uber treats itself purely as a platform saying that we are helping discovery of cabs.
[Guest]: And they claim to not be accountable for the behavior of the drivers because they're a
[Guest]: pure marketplace.
[Guest]: But the fact is that they are responsible because they're selecting who gets on the
[Guest]: platform, and they need to do their own due diligence.
[Guest]: There's another debate when it's coming to around rights of drivers as either employees
[Guest]: versus, you know, or just being merchants on Uber's platform.
[Guest]: And so, you know, there is what's happening right now, is that there's a gap between the
[Guest]: responsibility and the accountability of these platforms.
[Guest]: And that exists today because of something called intermediary liability protections.
[Guest]: That means that an intermediary, like an ISP, like a Facebook, an Amazon or an Uber, is
[Guest]: not liable for the actions of the entities on it.
[Guest]: And we had our own case in India around that with essentially Bazi.com, where Avneesh Bajaj
[Guest]: was arrested because someone put up a porn CD on sale on Bazi.com.
[Guest]: It later became eBay, India.
[Guest]: But we brought in those protections as well in India to protect the platforms which are
[Guest]: merely mean marketplaces for exchange, right?
[Guest]: Now, because of the scale of a lot of these platforms and the impact that they're having,
[Guest]: and how they impact even merchants and the power that they have over them, and the fact
[Guest]: that they can shape consumer behavior now, countries are looking at regulating them,
[Guest]: because they are responsible for some of this behavior of not, let's say, clamping down
[Guest]: on fake news, but they're not held accountable because they have these protections.
[Guest]: So why I'm worried about the open internet going forward is that these intermediary liability
[Guest]: protections, which I support, look like they're going to get chipped away at bit by bit by
[Amit Varma]: bit.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to come back to this and I'll ask you to elaborate on this because it's very
[Amit Varma]: interesting and I share the same worries.
[Amit Varma]: There's a tangential thought, though, I just want to throw up.
[Amit Varma]: It's not an argument.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a tangential thought.
[Amit Varma]: I've also written op-eds and columns bemoaning, you know, what the whole fake news culture
[Amit Varma]: and more than that, what has happened to our political discourse with polarization and
[Amit Varma]: echo chambers and so on, all of it enabled by technology.
[Amit Varma]: But my point here is that we might be shooting the messenger, because what all of this points
[Amit Varma]: to is that human beings have frailties in their psychological needs and the way they
[Amit Varma]: think about things, like why fake news dominates so much is that people also need to believe
[Amit Varma]: in fake news that once they've given their allegiance to a tribe, they will ignore everything
[Amit Varma]: from outside.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, just the confirmation bias kicks in and they'll just consume content that is
[Unknown]: tailored to their biases and so on.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you spoke about how Facebook created these pages which said, you don't
[Amit Varma]: have to go out and vote, just click here.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, to me, what that indicates is a human frailty.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that technology amplifies these frailties leads to huge problems.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, the amplification isn't the problem because technology, the flip side is it also
[Amit Varma]: empowers all of us.
[Amit Varma]: So the issue here isn't the technology.
[Amit Varma]: The issue here is that people are flawed and frail in these ways.
[Amit Varma]: And that brings about the philosophical question that if human beings are like this, is it
[Amit Varma]: the state's job to save them from themselves?
[Amit Varma]: And I would argue that the difficult answer to that is no.
[Guest]: Well, the way I look at it is that, for again, for free speech to sustain, for democracies
[Guest]: to sustain, certain amount of paternalism needs to kick in at some point in time.
[Guest]: Now, what the threshold for that to kick in is the one that we have to consider.
[Guest]: Now, in case of, let's say, let's take the 66-day judgment, which was from 2015.
[Guest]: If you're a free speech absolutist, you would say that all speech is kosher.
[Guest]: But we have reasonable restrictions there in order to protect people, in order to protect
[Amit Varma]: democracies.
[Guest]: So I must say I'm an absolutist and I feel there should be those restrictions should
[Guest]: not be there.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But so, for example, there is a restriction on the incitement to violence.
[Guest]: Now, what we fought against was not against incitement to violence.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm someone who believes that incitement to violence should not be allowed and people
[Guest]: should be put in jail for inciting violence.
[Amit Varma]: But then you're like an accessory to a crime.
[Guest]: It doesn't exactly fall under free speech.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: So again, if you're an absolutist, it wouldn't be a crime.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: I disagree.
[Unknown]: I think that's a narrow view of an absolutist.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: I would have.
[Unknown]: That's an accessory to a crime.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: If you are instigating a crime, you're part of that crime.
[Unknown]: No, but it is a reasonable restriction that is there in terms of non-free speech.
[Unknown]: Why does it need to be applied to free speech as opposed to being applied to the violence
[Guest]: that's been committed?
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: At least it applies to the violence as well.
[Amit Varma]: Like the US Supreme Court had a guideline, which was, you know, the phrase clear and
[Amit Varma]: present danger.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That if there is, if you say something and there is clear and present danger, if I remember
[Amit Varma]: correctly, if there's clear and present danger and some, its imminent damage will be caused
[Amit Varma]: because of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, for example, if you stand out there and you say that libertarians are terrible people,
[Amit Varma]: I wish they didn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: I think that should absolutely be allowed.
[Amit Varma]: But if you were to say, there's Amit Verma, he's a libertarian, kill him.
[Amit Varma]: That's wrong.
[Unknown]: That's not necessary.
[Unknown]: Fire in a crowded theatre, right?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, like, no, that's, that's actually a different, it's the same kind of thing.
[Guest]: I've written a few pieces on that.
[Guest]: The fire in a crowded theatre is a terrible example, but let's not go into that.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm saying that, that, that's not allowed under the Sixth Sense Judgment as well.
[Guest]: So paternalism will kick in at some point in time to prevent harm from taking place.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think, I think, I think we're defining paternalism differently though.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: Now, when you go back to, let's say, how these platforms are essentially being governed,
[Guest]: the lack of governance there from the platforms themselves is hampering the existence of countries
[Guest]: and democracies.
[Guest]: Now, if you're going to come at me and say that, that, you know, geographical boundaries
[Guest]: shouldn't exist, countries shouldn't exist, that's a, that's a completely different debate.
[Guest]: But it is for the protection of the state and for the people in the state, that some
[Amit Varma]: of this paternalism has to kick in.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I don't...
[Amit Varma]: From a regulatory perspective.
[Amit Varma]: See, I don't call this paternalism.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I'll, I'll, I'll define it my way.
[Guest]: I think the state...
[Guest]: For me, all state action is paternalism.
[Amit Varma]: No, I don't think so.
[Amit Varma]: I think the state's legitimate duty, I mean, we can agree to disagree, but I think the
[Amit Varma]: state's legitimate duty is to protect the rights of its citizens.
[Amit Varma]: So if you stand up and say, there's Amit, he's a libertarian, kill him, then obviously
[Amit Varma]: the state, you know, you're being an accessory to a crime or you're causing one to be committed
[Amit Varma]: and the state is entirely entitled to protect the rights of Amit the libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't consider that paternalism, but paternalism would be to say that if you are
[Amit Varma]: to say that libertarians are bad people, and then I protest to the state and I'll say that,
[Amit Varma]: please make Nikhil shut up.
[Guest]: We should never be able to say this again.
[Guest]: That is wrong.
[Guest]: Even the judgment looks at, at advocacy and incitement differently.
[Guest]: Right, right.
[Guest]: And there's nothing wrong with advocacy, which is what this judgment clearly defines.
[Guest]: So, but again, we've moved away from...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Unknown]: These are the minor things we can agree to disagree about, the meaning of words.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: I'm just like, where did we go?
[Guest]: So, so let's go back to the concentration of power and what that means, because what's
[Guest]: happened since 2012-2013 is that these large platforms have become substantially large.
[Guest]: So between Tencent, Baidu, Amazon, Google, Apple, Microsoft, Facebook, the world's essentially
[Guest]: being carved out amongst these players.
[Guest]: Now there's competition that's taking place between them, but each of them has a disproportionate
[Guest]: amount of ability to influence the future of countries and indeed the future of the
[Guest]: internet.
[Guest]: So I think, so what I'm worried about is like, I'm someone who started a site almost 10 years
[Guest]: ago with very little money, and now we've been around for 10 years, our ability to do,
[Guest]: so for example, advertising as a revenue source has been shrinking substantially because all
[Guest]: of it is being aggregated by Facebook and Google.
[Guest]: Now this is legitimately one market power, the way I see it.
[Guest]: But it's also inhibiting competition.
[Guest]: And so therefore, antitrust can't quite kick in because, one, there is no indication of
[Guest]: clear harm, but also there is no clear indication that these guys are doing something to inhibit
[Unknown]: There's no nefarious activity.
[Guest]: But at the same time, is that healthy for the space is something which is being debated
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: It's the shrinking of the web, you know, so you're more likely to start a business, an
[Guest]: e-commerce site, for example, on an e-commerce service on Amazon, rather than start your
[Guest]: own e-commerce portal now, because market power is retained by Amazon and Flipkart,
[Amit Varma]: for that matter.
[Guest]: But here's the dilemma, so that, so that, that fragmentation, which was the internet,
[Guest]: and the impact that that had on allowing people to come and have the freedom to create the
[Guest]: freedom to build something of their own, is kind of getting lost bit by bit.
[Guest]: So I'm worried about where we're going here, because then what happens is, instead of that
[Guest]: free open space, which we had, we will now all be subject to the terms and conditions
[Guest]: of these platforms, because really, we don't have any other place to play on anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the kind of solutions that you propose, number one, and number two, what
[Amit Varma]: are the kind of solutions you're worried about coming from governments or other parties?
[Guest]: So I don't really have a solution right now, I have more of a problem that I'm trying to
[Guest]: articulate.
[Guest]: Because I'm also someone who wants limited government action and all of this, right?
[Guest]: Because I don't want us to lose intermediary liability protections.
[Guest]: You know, even if you think about it, net neutrality was exactly that battle, that the
[Guest]: ISPs should not shape our internet experience, because they have exclusive access, or exclusive
[Guest]: ability to control how we access the internet.
[Guest]: And there was a great deal of cartelization in India, which now has been affected, or
[Guest]: no longer exists because Jio came in.
[Guest]: But I think the best analogy that I heard for ISPs, and I think we need to look at other
[Guest]: platforms from that perspective as well, is to think of them as stock exchanges.
[Guest]: So like, if a stock exchange starts prioritizing a particular trade, it reduces trust in that
[Guest]: stock exchange.
[Guest]: In the same way, if an ISP starts prioritizing one source of data versus another, makes it
[Guest]: cheaper for you to access one particular source of, let's say, videos versus another, they're
[Guest]: shaping your experience, and that reduces trust in the ISP itself.
[Guest]: Now, in an open free market situation, you would have a million other ISPs to go to.
[Guest]: But that doesn't happen because spectrum is limited, right of way access is limited.
[Guest]: We don't have unbundling of the last mile in India.
[Guest]: And therefore, these are the controllers of our access in a sense.
[Guest]: So let's say if you think about from free speech perspective, you and I are talking
[Guest]: face to face.
[Guest]: But when we're talking over the internet, there are multiple layers that come in.
[Guest]: So one is the it starts with the device, then it goes to the network, which is the ISP,
[Guest]: then there are submarine cable providers, then there are platforms to which that data
[Guest]: goes.
[Guest]: Then again, the same exercise towards the person who's receiving it, right.
[Guest]: So all of these players in the middle have the potential for changing how we communicate,
[Guest]: whether we're able to speak to each other or not.
[Amit Varma]: I'd say one important thing about free speech, and a lot of people don't get this, like often
[Guest]: if I block someone on Twitter, they'll be like, you're attacking my free speech.
[Unknown]: Well, the truth is that you can say whatever you want, you can choose not to receive, you
[Amit Varma]: are not entitled to my attention, you're entitled to say whatever you want in your own space.
[Amit Varma]: So similarly, in this case, we are not like if you and I want to communicate online, and
[Amit Varma]: of course, we are going through all these different intermediaries.
[Amit Varma]: But we are not entitled to any platforms.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as we have a choice of platforms, it should not matter.
[Guest]: But the point you're making is we don't, we don't, you see, because you will not have
[Guest]: 100 million submarine cable providers in the world, right?
[Guest]: You will not have, you don't even have, let's say you have about 200 or 168, I think ISPs
[Guest]: in India, right?
[Guest]: But really, three or four of them own most of the access, right?
[Guest]: In the same way, but they compete with each other or other cartels.
[Guest]: So I view them as so the smaller ones are too small to compete with the larger ones
[Amit Varma]: which operate like cartels.
[Amit Varma]: And the smaller ones will depend on the larger ones also to a lesser extent.
[Guest]: There is a great deal of dependency between them also, also because when it comes to international
[Guest]: bandwidth access, there are only very few gateways.
[Guest]: And many of those ISPs also own the gateways.
[Guest]: So therefore, you know, what I'm saying is that it's the number of intermediaries in
[Guest]: this entire process can change the way we communicate, can prevent us from communicating.
[Guest]: And therefore, you need neutrality in their behavior to ensure that free speech is communicated.
[Guest]: The other thing is that I don't, and this, this is a, this is something which a lot of
[Guest]: people miss, right?
[Guest]: And especially libertarians, which is that the internet is not just a market.
[Guest]: So one of the things that many people, especially libertarians miss is that the internet is
[Guest]: not just a marketplace.
[Guest]: It's also a global public commons, right?
[Guest]: We don't just sell what we create.
[Guest]: There is contribution that's happening to community run spaces, community owned spaces.
[Guest]: So if you think about Wikipedia, if you think about GitHub and the code that's created,
[Guest]: the ability for us to contribute to each and all of these are also own platforms run by
[Guest]: separate organizations.
[Guest]: But the ability for us to contribute to each other, you know, this is the space that's
[Amit Varma]: given us the creative commons license, for example.
[Amit Varma]: That's the definition of a market, by the way, a market basically is a web of voluntary
[Guest]: interactions.
[Guest]: That's all it is.
[Guest]: But you get the gist of what I'm saying, it's not just, it's not just owned by private parties
[Amit Varma]: in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, and this is probably the gist of everything.
[Amit Varma]: What do you want the government to do?
[Guest]: And what do you want the government to not do?
[Guest]: I don't really have an answer to that question.
[Amit Varma]: Because given a part answer, what do you want, what are you worried that the government might
[Amit Varma]: do, which, for example, the government could easily overreach, overregulate and become
[Guest]: totalitarian.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: So this is where I'm sort of caught in a bind saying that, I do believe that we need regulation
[Guest]: to ensure neutrality and to ensure that, for example, national interest is protected, citizens
[Guest]: are protected, foreign actors can't come in and manipulate elections in our country.
[Guest]: At the same time, I'm afraid of overregulation, which might create, put in liability on these
[Guest]: intermediaries.
[Guest]: You know, so if, if there is liability, then there is no reason to do this business in
[Guest]: that sense.
[Amit Varma]: It's a chilling effect.
[Guest]: Then it's not just a chilling effect.
[Guest]: If it's just, it's impossible for these businesses to sustain.
[Unknown]: So I'll give you an example.
[Unknown]: Sorry?
[Unknown]: It stops everything, right?
[Unknown]: It shuts you down.
[Guest]: So think about it this way.
[Guest]: If YouTube was held liable for every video that's put up on YouTube, the number of court
[Guest]: cases would essentially kill YouTube, right?
[Amit Varma]: So there are more lawyers than coders.
[Amit Varma]: There are more content creators than there are lawyers.
[Guest]: And so therefore each is a case in that sense.
[Guest]: And so this is the safe harbor that these intermediaries have gotten, has given us the
[Guest]: internet that we have.
[Guest]: Like one of the things that's happening amongst the music industry, for example, and this
[Guest]: is based on conversations I've had with a bunch of people in the music business over
[Guest]: the years in India, is that they want the ISPs to be held liable for piracy, saying
[Guest]: that the ISPs are distributors of pirated content and they make money because we download
[Guest]: more, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: If that happens, ISPs would shut down essentially.
[Amit Varma]: And that's absurd.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's like saying that if someone takes stolen goods on a road, then the person who
[Guest]: owns the road should be liable.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: But this is still an argument which finds favor with some people in government, with
[Guest]: some regulators.
[Guest]: And so therefore I worry about opening the gates to government regulation there, right?
[Guest]: And what's going to happen as a consequence of that could be disastrous for internet and
[Unknown]: disastrous for users.
[Guest]: So does deregulation work as a solution over here?
[Guest]: Again, deregulation also doesn't work because we are currently operating in a deregulated
[Guest]: space.
[Guest]: And without any regulation, we have, you know, several problems which have cropped up, like
[Guest]: for example, fake news, a large amount of hate speech and abuse, a significant amount
[Guest]: of privacy violations, the creation of filter bubbles, you know, terrorist outfits, using
[Guest]: that anonymity that the internet provides.
[Guest]: And I mean, I'm someone who supports anonymity because it gives vulnerable communities a
[Guest]: voice.
[Guest]: But the same anonymity has also been used, for example, by ISIS handles, right?
[Guest]: So there's no right answer to this.
[Guest]: We have to find a balance.
[Guest]: Because somewhere we have to look at from a harms regulation perspective.
[Guest]: So the other part of this entire platform battle that's going on is around data protection
[Guest]: and privacy.
[Guest]: Because the amount of data that they're collecting, that gives them the ability to, again, create
[Guest]: more filter bubbles, target people better, allow advertisers to target people more sharply
[Guest]: and yet not control what kind of communication advertising is going there.
[Guest]: Because it's going at such a large scale, it's impossible for them to monitor as well.
[Guest]: So we've got this beast that we're dealing with right now.
[Guest]: And we want the beast because there's great benefit that comes from it.
[Guest]: But there's also great harms that come from it.
[Guest]: And so somewhere from a deregulation perspective, you know, so, for example, net neutrality
[Guest]: is a kind of deregulation because through the regulation of imposing net neutrality,
[Guest]: you have a deregulated space on the internet.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, I don't exactly agree, there are laws which govern them.
[Guest]: And largely, it allows the freedom to do legal things.
[Amit Varma]: I think, moving aside from like these specific issues.
[Guest]: Let me just, there are two other things.
[Guest]: One of the things that we still, that is going to come up for discussion is algorithmic neutrality.
[Guest]: Because it's the way the algorithms are functioning without regulation, being a black box that
[Guest]: is impacting the content that people consume, and has a potential to impact again, has a
[Guest]: potential to impact democracies, device neutrality is another one that's going to come up around
[Amit Varma]: that same issue.
[Amit Varma]: So I think trying to enforce some of these neutralities, like telling a company what
[Unknown]: kind of algorithms it can or cannot use is problematic in some senses.
[Unknown]: By definition, they're going to have bias built in and they're made by humans, right?
[Guest]: So here's where the intermediary liability comes back to this discussion, right?
[Guest]: It's applicable to platforms, and effectively is based on the fact that platforms have no
[Guest]: say in what people consume.
[Guest]: Now, if an algorithm is controlling what you can consume, effectively, it's no longer a
[Guest]: neutral platform.
[Guest]: It's an intermediate liability, protections will not be available.
[Amit Varma]: But see, here's the thing, every algorithm, as Amit just said, is, will have some kind
[Unknown]: of bias.
[Unknown]: You're right, but I buy what he's saying as well, that I mean, like the second you introduce
[Amit Varma]: the bias into the system, at that point in time, it's no longer neutral.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the moment you try to regulate the bias, you introduce another bias into the
[Amit Varma]: system.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think, I think the important thing here is you let users choose between biases.
[Guest]: That's exactly the solution, right?
[Guest]: So if let's say, on Facebook, I had the ability to delete my entire history, right?
[Guest]: And start over, right?
[Guest]: I don't right now.
[Guest]: But I can have a fresh newsfeed with no bias in the system at that point in time, right?
[Guest]: That freedom is useful.
[Guest]: If I had, let's say, four different algorithms to choose from, or maybe 100 different algorithms
[Guest]: to choose from, that again, allows me choice from that perspective.
[Amit Varma]: But to get to that space from here, isn't a better way of doing it, consumer activism,
[Amit Varma]: users saying that, hey, no, we don't like these features, we want those, rather than
[Amit Varma]: government regulation.
[Unknown]: I mean, I know you're not suggesting that, but I think the classic problematic in this
[Unknown]: kind of a situation, right?
[Unknown]: I mean, like, how is any kind of government action going to be able to define the rules
[Unknown]: that algorithms need to function under?
[Guest]: I mean, like, how is that even a possibility?
[Guest]: So there are discussions that are going on around that, which is around essentially regulating
[Guest]: for harms.
[Guest]: So if there is demonstrable harm that's coming out from an algorithm, and you can feed a
[Guest]: data set to see what's happening there, there is a potential for regulation to go and correct
[Unknown]: it.
[Unknown]: That feels very nebulous to me.
[Guest]: It's a complicated one.
[Guest]: And these are early days.
[Guest]: What I'm pointing towards is that these things are going to happen in the future.
[Guest]: Because this problem is only growing, right, and the US elections is a clear indication,
[Guest]: elections in Italy as well.
[Guest]: So these are, I mean, we have, in India here, we have a major fake news problem right now.
[Guest]: And again, that's again, two internet issues fighting off against each other, right?
[Guest]: So one is the problem of fake news.
[Guest]: The other is need for privacy.
[Guest]: You have end-to-end encryption on WhatsApp, but WhatsApp is where most of the fake news
[Guest]: is being distributed.
[Guest]: It's the largest media platform in the country.
[Amit Varma]: And again, there's a human tendency and hunger for fake news.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, we're shooting the messenger.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're saying is also cautionary in a sense, because I know you'll agree with
[Amit Varma]: my principle that whenever you give government any kind of power, you have to assume that
[Amit Varma]: it will necessarily be misused.
[Amit Varma]: So if you give government the power to regulate Facebook, then assume that if you're a left
[Amit Varma]: liberal, assume that Yogi Adityanath will be prime minister and he'll be running, he'll
[Amit Varma]: be setting that regulation.
[Amit Varma]: And if you are more culturally oriented and not anti-national, then assume that Sonia
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi will be somehow in charge and running.
[Amit Varma]: You have to assume that the worst person you can think of is in power in the government
[Amit Varma]: and give power to the government accordingly and build in enough safeguards to that accordingly.
[Guest]: No, so we need the safeguards there.
[Guest]: So we need regulation with oversight and safeguards.
[Guest]: And of course, it's not a perfect science.
[Guest]: We've had issues in every single instance where this has happened.
[Guest]: But I think we have, the world is fast reaching a point where doing nothing is not an option.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, the problem with India essentially is that a lot of the problems
[Amit Varma]: that are caused by government, people can't think of any other solution to them, but more
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: But this is not just India, right?
[Guest]: If you look at...
[Guest]: And this is a social problem, but all social problems cannot be solved by government intervention.
[Guest]: If you look at Trump's election, for example, and the alleged usage of misinformation, filter
[Guest]: bubbles by... and the Russian involvement and all of that... by the Russians, in fact,
[Guest]: and the impact that that has had, like I gave you that example of, hey, you can go on the
[Guest]: site and vote.
[Guest]: You don't need to go to the election booth, right?
[Amit Varma]: Those things are real problems.
[Amit Varma]: But here's my point.
[Amit Varma]: See, I find Trump's election very distasteful and disturbing and literally depressing.
[Amit Varma]: I was just very sad that day and I was also the same day demonetization happened.
[Amit Varma]: So it was a double whammy for all of us believers in liberty.
[Amit Varma]: But then the point is, people are entitled to vote as they want, to get whatever news
[Amit Varma]: they want, to believe whatever they want.
[Amit Varma]: That's the heart of individual freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I agree, there's a social problem there, which you've correctly identified, the filter
[Guest]: bubbles and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: What you're ignoring there is the issue of bounded rationality and information asymmetry.
[Amit Varma]: Both of these issues are very real.
[Amit Varma]: I'm taking those for granted, but I'm saying government intervention leads you to totalitarianism
[Guest]: in this case.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: My point here is, I'm someone who was inherently opposed to the idea of government regulating
[Unknown]: a space that means freedom for me.
[Guest]: But I have my senses, this is bound to happen now.
[Guest]: This is and because this is, unfortunately, an idea whose time has come because of all
[Guest]: the dangers.
[Guest]: And it started with the Arab Spring.
[Guest]: We've come a long way from the Arab Spring where, you know, it was people on Facebook
[Guest]: who got together and that led to a revolution.
[Guest]: Here now, it's been a change in government and electing someone is being instigated through
[Guest]: these means.
[Guest]: So I don't think there's any going back from there, because every single government in
[Amit Varma]: the world from now on is going to be conscious.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to ask you another different follow up question and go deeper into this.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'd just like to say that, look, a problem which is caused by the large
[Amit Varma]: scale voluntary actions of individuals can only, in my view, be solved by the large scale
[Amit Varma]: voluntary actions of individuals, whatever form it takes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an unknown, unknown.
[Guest]: We don't know what that is.
[Guest]: But then what you're doing is you're ignoring a period of indoctrination, using fake information
[Guest]: to make people believe that something is real.
[Guest]: Because I mean, if you look at it, we are in an era where there is going to be AI generated
[Amit Varma]: videos.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And for most people, they will not be able to make out the difference between one and
[Amit Varma]: the other.
[Amit Varma]: If you are able to have a podcast where you are attacking net neutrality and saying completely
[Guest]: the opposite things, AI can do that.
[Guest]: But that wouldn't be me.
[Guest]: It would be your voice.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, so the question I want to ask is, like, we are more or less on the same page.
[Amit Varma]: These are minor sort of bickerings, which, you know, can, which are the fun things to
[Unknown]: talk about.
[Amit Varma]: We're pretty much on the same page.
[Amit Varma]: But so my question here goes away from the problem itself, to the kind of activism you've
[Amit Varma]: done where you did the Save the Internet campaign and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is this, can you tell me a little bit about the different interest groups
[Amit Varma]: involved and what the interplay between them is, for example, a big company would, contrary
[Amit Varma]: to what people think always be against free markets, they'd be looking to consolidate
[Amit Varma]: their turf and to prevent newcomers from coming in and they'd be against competition.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you would have small groups of people with absolutely no voice like you and
[Amit Varma]: me who would want competition and want markets to prevail.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you would have different government bodies operating in their own silos, who would
[Amit Varma]: want to explore opportunities for rent seeking.
[Amit Varma]: So how do, how does an interplay between the different interest group play out?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what are they?
[Amit Varma]: And you've actually been part of negotiating with all of these interest groups, right at
[Guest]: different points in time.
[Guest]: So, so the way I looked at that campaign and the way we started it was this idea that we
[Guest]: need to first inform people and then give them a voice.
[Guest]: And interest groups will align in whichever way they want, but if there are enough people
[Guest]: involved and enough people who support net neutrality, people will align in support.
[Guest]: So you decided to make it a mass movement?
[Guest]: We decided to make it a mass movement from the very beginning because, look, I've taken
[Guest]: part in TRI consultations over, I mean, over the last decade on several occasions.
[Guest]: I've sat in, I know how the process works and the TRI really has the most open and transparent
[Amit Varma]: process.
[Amit Varma]: What are their interests?
[Amit Varma]: What do they want?
[Guest]: What are they fighting for?
[Guest]: Tell me.
[Guest]: So historically what's happened with the TRI is that, you know, the industry guys, the
[Guest]: lobbyists for mobile operators, etc, go and visit them twice a week.
[Guest]: They visit different people.
[Guest]: They are very organized in terms of they know who to talk to, what about, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So if you have someone at a regulator who doesn't necessarily have much information
[Guest]: but is not very tech savvy, then these people become a source of that knowledge for them.
[Guest]: And of course they do want counterpoints because they want to be neutral in this entire process.
[Guest]: They want to be fair in this entire process.
[Guest]: But there aren't enough players on the other side that come and speak to them.
[Guest]: There's also a credibility issue.
[Guest]: So for example, who am I to go and speak, even though I have an opportunity?
[Guest]: Every single individual in this country, every citizen can go and speak at a TRI event, at
[Guest]: a TRI open house and voice their views on a particular issue.
[Guest]: What we did was we ensured that there was enough of a collective voice for citizens
[Guest]: in that particular situation because we were battling all the mobile operators which have
[Guest]: a tremendous amount of power which the TRI had a great deal of affinity for because they
[Guest]: instigated this entire consultation process.
[Guest]: We had politicians who really did not have a clue about what net utility is in the beginning
[Guest]: and I can't really blame them because most people in this country did not understand
[Guest]: what it is about.
[Guest]: We had businesses who again didn't have too much of a clue but there was a clear benefit
[Guest]: for them in terms of at least the larger players for taking ownership of internet access to
[Guest]: their own benefit.
[Guest]: So you had the operators which would enable this, you had the businesses that would benefit
[Guest]: from it and so utility had no voice in this entire debate and I got this feeling on two
[Guest]: particular occasions.
[Guest]: One was the TRI open discussion, they had a discussion with industry stakeholders invited
[Guest]: on creating a revenue share model between online content creators and service providers
[Guest]: and the ISPs.
[Guest]: So they wanted a revenue share so if you have advertising running on your site the ISPs
[Guest]: would get a revenue share of that advertising.
[Guest]: So when I saw that TRI seemed to be open to this discussion that was a warning signal
[Guest]: and it felt very lonely in that room to be honest even though there were a few other
[Guest]: people who spoke up for net utility but I actually at one point in time stood up and
[Guest]: pointed towards the free speech argument saying do you realize what you're trying to do over
[Guest]: here and how it's going to impact people and their communication and that this is going
[Guest]: to get a constitutional challenge.
[Guest]: And the TRI backed off a bit, they're like you know we're just discussing stuff here
[Guest]: but really there was too much power in that room going against us.
[Guest]: So the idea behind the net utility campaign was that votes beat money and so we went out
[Guest]: and got the votes and we so we had we had to fight off fairly significant stakeholders.
[Guest]: I don't know if I've answered your question really.
[Amit Varma]: No your journey is fascinating and I think both Amit and I agree.
[Guest]: But I'll tell you where this philosophy is coming from right, there are two core ideas
[Guest]: to this and one of them is that all of us have a certain amount of free time and if
[Guest]: we love the internet we should be willing to contribute our time and our effort to making
[Guest]: it a better space for the generations that are going to follow.
[Unknown]: Because the internet dies and we'll all have a lot more free time.
[Guest]: So the other one, the other idea is this idea of active citizenship that we have to become
[Guest]: active citizens and get involved in these regulatory processes because what happens
[Guest]: is quite often we delegate that responsibility to our elected representatives or others and
[Guest]: that's not working for us right.
[Guest]: I mean Barack Obama has this great quote that we cannot solve the problems of our times
[Guest]: unless we solve them together.
[Guest]: So it's important for us to come together around issues that we really care about and
[Guest]: voice our concerns because there are enough elected representatives who will listen to
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: Governments will listen to us if we speak up.
[Guest]: But the problem quite often is that we feel that someone else will do our job for us.
[Amit Varma]: So it sounds like you overcame two classic public choice problems.
[Amit Varma]: Like these are two problems of public choice theory.
[Amit Varma]: One is the benefits are concentrated, the costs are diffused.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll have these interest groups or these big companies making a lot of money but the
[Amit Varma]: costs are so diffused that the people who are bearing the cost right as the citizens
[Amit Varma]: they don't even realize what's at stake.
[Amit Varma]: That's number one.
[Amit Varma]: And number two is that even if you get all the citizens to agree that hey this is a problem,
[Amit Varma]: there's what is called the free rider effect where they're willing to let someone else
[Amit Varma]: fight the battle for them and they'll post supporting tweets and supporting statuses
[Unknown]: but they won't do something themselves.
[Guest]: And you kind of overcame both of these.
[Guest]: And the idea was around how do we get people involved.
[Guest]: So that's where the tech team came in.
[Guest]: Like we put together a team in a matter of 12 days where we had a tech team in Bangalore,
[Guest]: we had a legal and policy team in Delhi and this is basically just me calling up friends
[Guest]: and saying hey listen this is going down, we need to do something about this.
[Guest]: And I'll be honest even at that point in time I did not fully understand how to tackle many
[Guest]: arguments around net neutrality.
[Guest]: But the thing was that together because we kept debating some of these things we learned
[Guest]: along the way.
[Guest]: If I didn't have an answer someone else came up with an answer.
[Guest]: We crowdsourced a lot of our learning from that perspective and the idea was to give
[Guest]: people ownership of this movement.
[Guest]: So another core philosophy of the movement was nobody owns the movement therefore everybody
[Guest]: owns the movement.
[Guest]: Because a lot of these battles fall apart when it comes to taking credit.
[Guest]: And I don't have the credit for this.
[Guest]: This belongs to everyone who participated.
[Guest]: This wasn't
[Guest]: All I did was go and start asking people for help and trying to give them a reason to get
[Amit Varma]: involved.
[Amit Varma]: This in fact runs up against another behavioural economics funder, diffuse responsibility.
[Amit Varma]: That if too many people have the responsibility for something nobody will do it.
[Guest]: So this is the opposite of that.
[Guest]: And I think that what we're seeing now because even around Aadhaar I'm interacting with a
[Guest]: lot of politicians is that there is a growing concern amongst politicians also that they
[Guest]: don't necessarily understand tech but they realise the impact that it's having.
[Guest]: And they want to help understand it from a user perspective, from a citizen perspective
[Guest]: because that's their core constituency.
[Guest]: Because historically they've only been visited by interest groups that seek to benefit commercially
[Guest]: from all of this.
[Guest]: So I think that the more
[Guest]: And we've got social media platforms now that allow us to communicate to our MPs.
[Guest]: I think one of the things that I want to work on over a period of time is to create more
[Guest]: platforms for engagement with the policy makers.
[Guest]: And that could be offline, that could be online.
[Guest]: I mean we've seen campaigns run where, especially in the US, where people call up their representatives.
[Guest]: How many of us do that here?
[Amit Varma]: And you've generally seen that MPs are open to these kinds of engagements?
[Guest]: Look we've
[Guest]: I'm not going to name people, but because we ran the Speak For Me campaign around Aadhaar,
[Guest]: one of the things that we saw was that there were about, this is what I've heard, that
[Guest]: there were 11 190 notices that were filed in the winter session of Parliament.
[Guest]: Because our campaign was around asking MPs to file 190 notices for discussions on Aadhaar
[Guest]: in Parliament.
[Guest]: And there were over 100 questions asked about Aadhaar in that session alone, which is the
[Guest]: largest that I've seen so far.
[Guest]: So I think that MPs, if citizens reach out to them, they do react, they do respond.
[Guest]: It's just that historically no one responds to them.
[Guest]: I mean during the Net Neutrality campaign, some of the MPs got 10s and 15,000 emails
[Guest]: from citizens.
[Guest]: These are MPs who typically would get 5 or 10 maybe in a month or something like that.
[Guest]: When you get that kind of volume, they know that people want to be heard.
[Guest]: So they are our representatives.
[Guest]: But our democracy, the way it's built, is that there's a big gap between the citizens
[Guest]: and the ones we elect.
[Guest]: And that's largely possible because the scale and no single voice is loud enough.
[Guest]: But it's almost like the creation of interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: So you bridge that gap with the very same technology you denigrate.
[Guest]: I know.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: But I'm saying, so that's, that's the beauty of all of this.
[Guest]: For every single thing that I've talked about today, there are pros and cons.
[Guest]: And so the idea is to find a balance.
[Amit Varma]: And the idea is to make sure the pros are more by voluntary action.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to end by asking both of you two questions, which is, what makes you worried
[Amit Varma]: about the future of the internet?
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you hopeful about the future of the internet?
[Unknown]: Amit, shall we start with you?
[Unknown]: Sure.
[Unknown]: So I mean, like worried, I guess would be a lot of what Nikhil is talking about.
[Unknown]: I think that is kind of a concern.
[Unknown]: Keep your hands off the internet, basically, you know, I mean, like, that would be my preference.
[Unknown]: But I also understand that there are compulsions around why that can't be 100% kind of maximalist
[Unknown]: argument.
[Unknown]: There has to be like some sort of nuance over there.
[Unknown]: And in terms of optimistic, I'm just, I'm generally very optimistic.
[Unknown]: I think that we haven't even, it's not even 20 years old, or it's just 20 years old, 25
[Unknown]: years old.
[Unknown]: It's, it's so new.
[Unknown]: You know, I mean, like in the context of history, I mean, like, we haven't even like scratched
[Unknown]: the surface of what we're going to get through this.
[Unknown]: So I mean, like, from an optimistic perspective, I think that just what's going to happen with
[Unknown]: this stuff is we haven't even seen anything close to what's going to happen.
[Guest]: Nikhil.
[Guest]: So you don't know what you've lost till it's gone.
[Guest]: And so I am extremely worried now about the openness of the internet, and the acts and
[Guest]: the controls that are being now used in terms of accessing the internet, the new people
[Guest]: who've come on board and have no idea about all the wonderful things that are there on
[Guest]: the internet for them to experience just because they have access to only a few apps, and they
[Guest]: don't even know how to go to a browser and type in a URL.
[Guest]: So I'm worried about how concentration of power is going to impact internet access in
[Guest]: the future.
[Guest]: What I am very optimistic about is that we're currently dealing with a generation that's
[Guest]: grown up with the internet.
[Guest]: And they care about the space, they love the space, even though some of them may be signing
[Guest]: up from some platforms, but I think most of us have access, we want access, and that's
[Guest]: going to continue.
[Guest]: So ours is a generation that's going to fight for the internet now.
[Guest]: And there are a large number of people who are as idealistic about it.
[Guest]: And essentially, this is the second rung that's going to be much better than us in terms of
[Guest]: fighting for the values that we want in the internet in a sense.
[Guest]: So I think I'm optimistic about that, because I interact with a lot of is I hate to use
[Guest]: the word youngsters, because that makes me feel old.
[Guest]: But if you are old, what are we?
[Guest]: But I do feel very hopeful when I interact with them, because there is genuine love for
[Guest]: the internet there.
[Amit Varma]: And these are the people who will fight for it in the future.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's a very gratifying and inspiring note to end this episode on.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you guys for coming.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Guest]: This is fun.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, you can follow Nikhil on Twitter at Nixon, N-I-X-X-I-N.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Amit Doshi at Doshi Amit.
[Amit Varma]: No space.
[Amit Varma]: I'd also encourage you to check out the tech podcast that Amit co-hosts, Shunya One, on
[Amit Varma]: the IVM podcast app or website.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: For past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen, including an episode I did with Nikhil on
[Amit Varma]: Aadhaar, please head over to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The Unseen, check out another hit show from Indus
[Amit Varma]: Fox Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcast.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!